FGAP documentation (#38422)
keycloak/keycloak: docs/documentation/server_admin/topics/admin-console-permissions/fine-grain-v2.adoc

[[_fine_grain_permissions]]

=== Fine grained admin permissions V2

> Sometimes roles like `manage-realm` or `manage-users` are too coarse grain and you want to create

Reviewer: As an introduction, I would put something like:

The Fine-Grained Admin Permissions feature allows server administrators to delegate realm management to other administrators, the realm administrators. Different than the regular Role-Based Access Control Mechanism provided through the `Global` and `Realm specific` foles (https://www.keycloak.org/docs/26.1.4/server_admin/#master-realm-access-control), this feature provides a more fine-grained control over how realm resources can be accessed and managed based on a well-defined set of operations that can be performed on them.

By relying on a Policy-Based Access Control, server administrators can define permissions to realm resources such as users, groups, and clients, using different policy types, or access control methods, so that a realm administrator is limited to access a subset of realm resources and their operations.

### Understanding the Realm Resource Types

In this section, I would put what you already have about each resource type and the permissions available for each of them.

### Enabling Fine-Grained Admin Permissions to a realm

### Managing Permissions

You already have some text for this section.

#### Defining permissions for viewing realm resources

#### Searching Permissions

You already have some text for this section.

#### Resolving conflicting permissions

You already have some text for this section.

### Evaluating Permissions

Explain the Evaluate tab

### Accessing a realm as a realm administrator
#### Granting the administrative roles to a realm administrator

### Understanding some common use cases

* Choose `manage` authorization scope, keep checked `All Users`
* Create a condition, which needs to be met to get an access by clicking `Create new policy`
* Fill name `"Allow test-admins"`, select `Group` as `Policy type`. 
* Click `Add groups` button and select `test-admins` group, click `Save`
* Click `Save` on `"Create permission"` page

The created permission, allows to manage all users in the realm for members of the `test-admins` group. 
Let's exlude the members of the group itself, so that `test-admins` cannot manage other admins.

* Create new permission by clicking `Create permission` button
* This time choose `Groups` resource type
* Fill the name, e.g. `"Disallow managing test-admins"`
* Choose `manage-members` authorization scope.
* Select `Specific Groups` and choose `test-admins` group
* `Create new policy` of type `Group`
* Fill the name `"Disallow test-admins"` and select `test-admins` group
* Switch to `Negative Logic` for the policy, `Save` the policy
* `Save` the permission

==== Full list of permissions

TODO this section needs review.

This chapter defines the whole list of permission types that can be described for a realm.

===== Client

> view::

Reviewer: IMO, a table is better to list all the scopes/permissions that can be set to a resource.

on them.

By relying on a Policy-Based Access Control, server administrators can define permissions to realm resources such as users, 
groups, and clients, using different policy types, or access control methods, so that a realm administrator is limited to 
access a subset of realm resources and their operations.

Here are some key points to understand about fine-grained admin permissions:

* Fine grained permissions are only available within <<_per_realm_admin_permissions, dedicated admin consoles>> or 
  realm-specific admin API and admins defined within those realms. You cannot define cross-realm fine grained permissions.
* Fine grained permissions are used to grant additional permissions. You cannot override the default behavior of the 
  built-in admin roles.

[NOTE]
====
To maximize the effectiveness of fine-grained admin permissions while minimizing the impact of broad admin roles, 
it is recommended to assign the `query-clients`, `query-groups`, and `query-users` roles (along with roles required 
for realm management) to allow querying. All other administrative access could be managed through fine-grained permissions.
====

==== Understanding the Realm Resource Types

> Administrators can manage access to the following resource types:

Reviewer: I'm missing understanding what a realm resource type is:

In a realm, you can manage different types of resources such as users, groups, clients, client scopes, roles, and etc.  As a realm administrator, you are constantly managing these resources to manage your identities and how they authenticate and authorize to a realm and your applications.

Each realm resource supports a well-defined set of management operations, or actions, that can be performed on them, such as `view`, `manage`, and resource-specific operations such as `view-members` if you take groups as an example.

This feature provides the necessary mechanisms to enforce access to a well-defined set of realm resources, limited to:

* `Users`
* `Clients`
* `Groups`
* `Roles`

When managing permissions for a specific realm resource type, you can choose to do it for all resources of a given resource type, such as `Users`, or for a specific realm resource, such as a specific user in the realm.

#### User Realm Resources

The `Users` realm resource type represents the users in a realm. You can manage permissions for  users based on the following set of management operations:

| Operation  | Description |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| `view`  | Defines if a realm administrator can view users.  |
| `manage`  | Defines if a realm administrator can manage users.  |

The same pattern can be used to describe the other resource types ....

[[_fine_grain_permissions]]

=== Fine grained admin permissions V2

> The Fine-Grained Admin Permissions feature allows server administrators to delegate realm management to other administrators, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With fine-grained admin permissions feature, you can delegate realm management to other administrators, 
```

- For certain operations like updating or deleting clients it is required both *manage* and *configure* assigned.
====

===== Roles Resource Type

The *Roles* realm resource type represents the roles in a realm. You can manage permissions for roles based on the following set of management operations:

[cols="30%,70%"]
|===
| *Operation*               | *Description*

| *map-role*               | Defines if a realm administrator can assign a role (or multiple roles) to a user.
| *map-role-composite*     | Defines if a realm administrator can assign a role (or multiple roles) as a composite to another role. 
| *map-role-client-scope*  | Defines if a realm administrator can apply a role (or multiple roles) to an another client’s scope.
|===

[NOTE]
====
* The *map-role* operation does not grant the ability to manage users or assign roles arbitrarily; the administrator must also have 
  user role mapping permissions.  
* When mapping client roles, if an administrator has permission to *map-roles*, *map-roles-composite*, or *map-roles-client-scope* for 
  a client, permissions for specific roles within that client are not evaluated.
====

==== Enabling admin permissions to a realm

> To enable fine-grained admin permissions to a realm, follow these steps:

Reviewer 2: Good, @sguilhen I say "in a realm"

- *query-clients* – Required to query realm clients.  

If an administrator is responsible for multiple resource types (such as both users and groups), they must have all corresponding "query-*" 
roles assigned.

These roles enable basic access to query resources but do not grant permission to view or modify them. To configure more fine-grained 
administrative access, additional permissions must be granted using fine-grained admin permissions.

===== Granting Administrative Roles to a Realm Administrator

A realm administrator’s access must be configured by someone with permission to assign administrative roles. At a minimum, the administrator 
must have:  

- The appropriate "query-*" roles, depending on the resource types they need to administer.

Beyond these foundational roles, *fine-grained admin permissions* can be used to define specific administrative capabilities. While fine-grained 
permissions allow for more granular control over access, they cannot override the default behavior of built-in admin roles.
This means that if an additional admin role is assigned to a realm administrator, permission evaluation will be bypassed, and access will be 

> granted.  

Reviewer 3: Not sure I understand this.. if you grant any admin-role to a user, then permission evaluation is skipped irrespective of the role?

Author: The role should be respective to the action. I was trying to say, that if you assign for instance `manage-clients` role to your "realm-admin", no permissions related to client management are evaluated. 

So even if you have permission saying "do not allow to manage this client", the assigned role takes precedence. 

Would you suggest better wording to describe this behavior?

Author: For now, I have replaced "additional" by "respective".

                             It does not grant the ability to *view* users.
| *query-groups*           | A realm administrator can see the *Groups* section in Admin Console and can search for groups in the realm. 
                             It does not grant the ability to *view* groups.
| *query-clients*          | A realm administrator can see the *Clients* section in Admin Console and can search for clients in the realm. 
                             It does not grant the ability to *view* clients.
| *view-users*             | A realm administrator can *view* all users and groups in the realm.
| *manage-users*           | A realm administrator can *view*, *map-roles*, *manage-group-membership* and *manage* all users in the realm, 
                             as well as *view*, *manage-membership* and *manage* groups in the realm.
| *impersonation*          | A realm administrator can *impersonate* all users in the realm.
| *view-clients*           | A realm administrator can *view* all clients in the realm.
| *manage-clients*         | A realm administrator can *view* and *manage* all clients and client scopes in the realm.
|===

==== Understanding some common use cases

> Let's say an admin wants to allow a group of admins to manage all users in the realm except those, which belongs to the
> administrators group. In our example, we have a realm called `test` and a group called `test-admins`. 
> 
> ===== Allow manage users by group of admins

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's say an administrator wants to allow a group of administrators to manage all users in the realm except those, which belongs to the
administrators group. In our example, we have a realm called `test` and a group called `test-admins`. 

===== Allow manage users by group of administrators
```

Realm specific roles (<<_master_realm_access_control, Master realm access control>>), this feature provides a more fine-grained 
control over how realm resources can be accessed and managed based on a well-defined set of operations that can be performed 
on them.

By relying on a Policy-Based Access Control, server administrators can define permissions to realm resources such as users, 
groups, and clients, using different policy types, or access control methods, so that a realm administrator is limited to 
access a subset of realm resources and their operations.

Here are some key points to understand about fine-grained admin permissions:

* Fine grained admin permissions are only available within <<_per_realm_admin_permissions, dedicated admin consoles>> or 
  realm-specific admin API and admins defined within those realms. You cannot define cross-realm fine grained permissions.
* Fine grained admin permissions are used to grant additional permissions. You cannot override the default behavior of the 
  built-in admin roles.
* Fine-grained admin permissions V2 do not support federated resources. This is a known limitation under consideration 

>   for future improvement.

Author: @pedroigor do you think it is sufficient to mention it here withing "key points"? Or would you suggest some changes?

Reviewer: Works for me to highlight it here. Thanks.

[[_fine_grain_permissions]]

=== Fine grained admin permissions V2

The Fine-Grained Admin Permissions feature allows server administrators to delegate realm management to other administrators, 

> the realm administrators. Different than the regular Role-Based Access Control Mechanism provided through the Global and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the realm administrators. Different from the regular Role-Based Access Control Mechanism provided through the Global and 
```

Realm specific roles (<<_master_realm_access_control, Master realm access control>>), this feature provides a more fine-grained 
control over how realm resources can be accessed and managed based on a well-defined set of operations that can be performed 
on them.

By relying on a Policy-Based Access Control, server administrators can define permissions to realm resources such as users, 
groups, and clients, using different policy types, or access control methods, so that a realm administrator is limited to 
access a subset of realm resources and their operations.

Here are some key points to understand about fine-grained admin permissions:

* Fine grained admin permissions are only available within <<_per_realm_admin_permissions, dedicated admin consoles>> or 

>   realm-specific admin API and admins defined within those realms. You cannot define cross-realm fine grained permissions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  realm-specific admin APIs and administrators defined within those realms. You cannot define cross-realm fine grained permissions.
```

* Fine grained admin permissions are used to grant additional permissions. You cannot override the default behavior of the 
  built-in admin roles.

> * Fine-grained admin permissions V2 do not support federated resources. This is a known limitation under consideration 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fine-grained admin permissions V2 do not support federated resources. This restriction is a known limitation under consideration 
```

Reviewer 2: Always follow this with a noun.

  for future improvement.

[NOTE]
====
To maximize the effectiveness of fine-grained admin permissions while minimizing the impact of broad admin roles, 

> it is recommended to assign the `query-clients`, `query-groups`, and `query-users` roles (along with roles required 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it is recommended to assign the *query-clients*, *query-groups*, and *query-users* roles (along with roles required 
```

Reviewer 2: Use *asterisks* if this appears on the screen.

for realm management) to allow querying. All other administrative access could be managed through fine-grained permissions.
See <<_realm_access_control, Accessing a Realm Admin Console as a Realm Administrator>> for more information.
====

==== Understanding the Realm Resource Types

> In a realm, you can manage different types of resources such as users, groups, clients, client scopes, roles, and etc. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a realm, you can manage different types of resources such as users, groups, clients, client scopes, roles, and so on. 
```

Reviewer 2: etc is Latin. Always replace with "and so on"

As a realm administrator, you are constantly managing these resources to manage your identities and how they authenticate 
and authorize to a realm and your applications.

Each realm resource supports a well-defined set of management operations, or actions, that can be performed on them, 
such as view, manage, and resource-specific operations such as view-members if you take groups as an example.

This feature provides the necessary mechanisms to enforce access to a well-defined set of realm resources, limited to:

> * `Users`
> * `Groups`
> * `Clients`
> * `Roles`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Users
* Groups
* Clients
* Roles
```

Reviewer 2: You don't need any formatting if it is not actually referring to the screen

When managing permissions for a specific realm resource type, you can choose to do it for all resources of a given resource 
type, such as `Users`, or for a specific realm resource, such as a specific user or set of users in the realm.

> ===== Users Resource Type

Reviewer 2: Replace ` with * throughout this section.

                             Even if an administrator can manage client roles, they must have `map-role-composite` privileges for 
                             the role they want to add as a composite.
| `map-role-client-scope`  | Defines if a realm administrator can apply this role to a client’s scope. Even if they can manage 
                             the client, they cannot create tokens for that client containing this role unless this privilege 
                             is granted.
|===

[NOTE]
====
- The `map-role` operation does not grant the ability to manage users or assign roles arbitrarily; the administrator must also 
  have user role mapping permissions. If an administrator has permission to `map-roles` for a client, permissions for specific 
  client roles are not evaluated when mapping the role.
- The `map-role-composite` operation ensures that administrators cannot add a role as a composite unless explicitly granted 
  permission.  
- The `map-role-client-scope` operation restricts the ability to apply roles to client scopes, even if the administrator has 
  client management privileges.
====

> ==== Enabling admin permissions to a realm

Reviewer 2: Replace ` with * everywhere you refer to something on the screen.   You only need ` for what you tell the user to type.

To enable fine-grained admin permissions to a realm, follow these steps:

* Log in to the Admin Console.

> * Navigate to `Realm settings`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Click *Realm settings*.
```

> * Enable the `Admin Permissions` switch and click `Save`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Enable *Admin Permissions* and click *Save*.
```

image:images/fine-grain-enable.png[Fine grain enable]

Once enabled, a `Permissions` section appears in the left-side menu of the administration console.

image:images/fine-grain-permissions-tab.png[Fine grain permissions tab]

==== Managing Permissions

The `Permissions` tab provides an overview of all active permissions within a realm. From here, administrators can create, 
update, delete, or search for permissions.

The `Policies` tab allows administrators to define conditions using different access control methods (`policy type`) to determine whether 
a permission should be granted to an administrator attempting to access a specific resource performing some operation. It also 

> supports basic searching capability, based on policy `name` and its `type`. Fine grained admin permissions were implemented on top of 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
supports basic searching capability, based on policy `name` and its `type`. Fine-grained admin permissions were implemented on top of 
```

IMPORTANT: When listing or searching for realm resources (such as clients, groups, or users) via the Admin Console or Admin API, {project_name} 
evaluates permissions that contain the `view` scope for the specific resource. For this operation, only role, user, and group policy types are 
considered, while other policy types are ignored due to partial evaluation performed at the database level. Because of this, only policies that 
reference the resource directly—whether through user association, group membership, or role assignment—are found and permissions assiciated with 
those are used for evaluation.

When checking whether an admin can view a specific user, all policy types are taken into account.

The partial evaluation mechanism helps identify and load relevant permissions from the database by using the resource 
identifiers that the realm administrator has permission to `view`. These identifiers are then applied in the subsequent 
database query to fetch the actual stream of resources. Currently, partial evaluation is only supported for non-federated 
resources, which is a limitation of the current implementation.

===== Searching Permissions

> The administration console provides several ways to search for permissions, supporting the following capabilities:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Admin Console provides several ways to search for permissions, supporting the following capabilities:
```

* Search for permissions that contain a specific string in their `Name`
* Search for permissions of a specific resource type, such as `Users`
* Search for permissions of a specific resource type that apply to a particular resource (e.g., `Users` resource type for user `myadmin`).

> * Search for permissions of a specific resource type with a given scope (e.g., `Users` resource type permissions with the `manage` scope).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Search for permissions of a specific resource type with a given scope (such as `Users` resource type permissions with the `manage` scope).
```

Reviewer 2: e.g. is Latin. Always use such as or for example.

> * Search for permissions of a specific resource type that apply to a particular resource and have a specific scope (e.g., `Users` resource 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Search for permissions of a specific resource type that apply to a particular resource and have a specific scope (such as `Users` resource 
```

  type permissions with the `manage` scope for user `myadmin`).

image:images/fine-grain-search.png[Fine grained permissions search]

==== Evaluating Permissions

The `Evaluation` tab provides a testing environment where administrators can verify that permissions are correctly enforcing access 
control as expected.

The administrator could see what permissions were involved in evaluation and what the outcome is by specifying a `username` of a user they 
want to verify, `Resource type`, resource (usermane of a `User` in this case) and optionally an authorization scope.

image:images/fine-grain-evaluation.png[Fine grained permissions evaluation tab]

> In the example above it is visible that user `myadmin`, can `manage` user `user-1`. There is also information what permissions were involved 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example above it is visible that the user `myadmin`, can `manage` user `user-1`. There is also information what permissions were involved 
```

in the evaluation, what outcome it had and what scopes were granted or denied.

[[_resolving-conflicting-permissions]]
===== Resolving conflicting permissions

Permissions can have multiple policies associated with them. As the authorization model evolves, it is common for some policies within a permission or 
even different permissions related to a specific resource to conflict.

The evaluation outcome will be "denied" whenever any permission is evaluated to "DENY." If there are multiple permissions related to the same resource, 
all of them must grant access in order for the outcome to be "granted."

IMPORTANT: Fine-grained admin permissions allow you to set up permissions for individual resources or for the resource type itself (e.g., all users, 
all groups, etc.). If a permission or permissions related to a specific resource exist, the "all-resource" permission is *NOT* taken into account 

> during evaluation. If no specific permission exists, the fallback is to the "all-resource" permission. This approach helps solve scenarios like 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
during evaluation. If no specific permission exists, the fallback is to the "all-resource" permission. This approach helps address scenarios like 
```

allowing members of the `realm-admins` group to manage members of realm groups, but preventing them from managing members of the `realm-admins` group 
themselves.

*View and Manage users and group members*

When evaluating `view` or `manage` permissions for users the group `view-members` and `manage-members` permissions are taken into an account.
The evaluation follows:

TODO: review following based on the actual behavior
* Specific user/group permissions take precedence over broader all-resource permissions.

> * If multiple permissions apply to a given user or group (e.g., multiple user-specific permissions, or a permission covering a set of 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If multiple permissions apply to a given user or group (such as multiple user-specific permissions, or a permission covering a set of 
```

* If no user/group-specific permissions exist, the evaluation falls back to all-resource permissions (`all-users`, `all-groups`).
* When both all-users and all-groups permissions exist, both must grant access for the outcome to be GRANTED.
* If only one of them exists, the outcome is determined by that permission alone.

[[_realm_access_control]]
==== Accessing a Realm Admin Console as a Realm Administrator

Realm administrators can access a dedicated realm-specific Admin Console, which allows them to manage resources within their assigned realm. 
This is separate from the main Keycloak Admin Console, which is typically used by server administrators.

For more details on dedicated realm admin consoles and available roles, refer to: <<_per_realm_admin_permissions, Dedicated admin consoles>>.

To access the Admin Console, a realm administrator must have at least one of the following roles assigned, depending on the resources they 
need to administer:

- `query-users` – Required to query realm users.  
- `query-groups` – Required to query realm groups.  
- `query-clients` – Required to query realm clients.  

> If an administrator is responsible for multiple resource types (e.g., both users and groups), they must have all corresponding `query-*` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an administrator is responsible for multiple resource types (such as both users and groups), they must have all corresponding `query-*` 
```

roles assigned.

These roles enable basic access to query resources but do not grant permission to view or modify them. To configure more fine-grained 
administrative access, additional permissions must be granted using fine-grained admin permissions.

===== Granting Administrative Roles to a Realm Administrator

A realm administrator’s access must be configured by someone with permission to assign administrative roles. At a minimum, the administrator 
must have:  

- The appropriate `query-*` roles, depending on the resource types they need to administer.

> Beyond these foundational roles, **fine-grained admin permissions** can be used to define specific administrative capabilities. While fine-grained 
> permissions allow for more granular control over access, they **cannot override the default behavior of built-in admin roles**.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Beyond these foundational roles, *fine-grained admin permissions* can be used to define specific administrative capabilities. While fine-grained 
permissions allow for more granular control over access, they cannot override the default behavior of built-in admin roles.  
```

administrators group. In our example, we have a realm called `test` and a group called `test-admins`. 

===== Allow manage users by group of admins

Create user permission permission, allowing to view and manage all users in the realm for members of the `test-admins` group:

* Navigate to the `Permissions` tab in the Admin Console.
* Click `Create permission` button and choose `Users` resource type
* Fill the name, e.g. `"Allow managing all realm users"`
* Choose `view` and `manage` authorization scopes, keep checked `All Users`
* Create a condition, which needs to be met to get an access by clicking `Create new policy`
* Fill name `"Allow test-admins"`, select `Group` as `Policy type`. 
* Click `Add groups` button and select `test-admins` group, click `Save`
* Click `Save` on `"Create permission"` page

===== Allow manage users by group of admins but not group members

Let's exlude the members of the group itself, so that `test-admins` cannot manage other admins.

* Create new permission by clicking `Create permission` button
* This time choose `Groups` resource type

> * Fill the name, e.g. `"Disallow managing test-admins"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fill in the name, such as `"Disallow managing test-admins"`
```

* Choose `manage-members` authorization scope.
* Select `Specific Groups` and choose `test-admins` group
* `Create new policy` of type `Group`
* Fill the name `"Disallow test-admins"` and select `test-admins` group
* Switch to `Negative Logic` for the policy, `Save` the policy
* `Save` the permission

=====  Allow impersonation of users for members of admin group with specific role assigned

> - Create a **User Permission** for specific users (or all users) you want to allow impersonation.
> - Create a **Group Policy** allowing access to members of `test-admins`.
> - Create a **Role Policy** allowing access to users assigned the `impersonation-admin` role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Create a *User Permission* for specific users (or all users) you want to allow impersonation.
- Create a *Group Policy* allowing access to members of `test-admins`.
- Create a *Role Policy* allowing access to users assigned the `impersonation-admin` role.
```

- Assign both policies to the permission.

===== Blacklist specific users from being impersonated

> - Create a **User Permission** for the specific users you want to prevent from being impersonated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Create a *User Permission* for the specific users you want to prevent from being impersonated.
```

Reviewer 2: You only need two asterisks in very specific situation, such as when the asterisk is followed by a colon, semi-colon, or special formatting characters.

> - Create any **Policy** that evaluates to deny (e.g., a user policy with no users selected).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Create any **Policy** that evaluates to deny (such as a user policy with no users selected).
```
